[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Joe Wisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, you know I've never had Nutella
before.
>> I know that. I think we were talking
about this the other day and I said, and
I mean this 100% and I don't mean it to
come off badly, but I genuinely feel
really sorry for you for never having
Nutella. I feel like you are missing out
on one of the the best things in life.
>> And you know, I've never had uh the
Dubai chocolate before either.
>> I know. Again, my sympathy for you just
continues to expand.
>> So, as everyone knows, you know, I'm
just like a real ahead of the curve guy
on most things. I was really ahead of
the curve on having nut allergies
because now like all kids basically have
nut allergies it seems like or like half
the kids in any uh my kids class. But I
was like really early on in the 19
>> You were having nut allergies before it
was cool.
>> I was having nut allergies before it was
cool. I'm aware that people love
Nutella. I'm aware that people love
Dubai chocolate or some people do or
they at least like posting about it on
Instagram and all things pistachios etc.
And yes, but I I I take it it's all good
stuff.
>> It's so good. Oh my god. Um, it's I mean
there is nothing better than eating
Nutella out of a spoon or sorry eating
Nutella out of a jar with a spoon.
Preferably with a glass of milk. Like it
is so good.
>> It looks good.
>> Do you buy chocolate?
>> Have you had it?
>> I have, but I'm not that enamored with
it.
>> Interesting. I remember like I it was
probably like a year and a half ago and
I just started seeing like signs like we
have the Dubai chocolate.
>> Oh, they're everywhere now. But the I
the other day I went to my uh the local
deli on my block and they had five just
on the counter. They had five different
version five different companies selling
it. Five different products that you
could buy which I take is just some sort
of you know chocolate with some sort of
creamy pistachio in the middle and if
you break it open it looks good on
social media.
>> That's pretty much it. I do find it kind
of funny that this like viral chocolate
has come out of Dubai of all places
which doesn't necessarily have a strong
confectionary history but uh it has
certainly tapped into various luxury
markets. So I think that's what's going
on. I was looking through uh the uh
conference call transcripts uh on the
Bloomberg a few weeks ago and I was
looking like what companies have talked
about this and there's one big Swiss
publicly traded chocolateier and they
talked about it and they talked about I
guess it was a woman in Dubai just
started making it then they called it
the Dubai chocolate anyway they were
talking about how fast they adapted to
Tik Tok trends etc. But I guess the
business of nuts and uh how it works not
something that we discuss much maybe
because of my own you know I'm I'm
allergic to talk about these topics.
>> Well there is one nut that you can eat.
>> That's right. Almonds.
>> Almonds. And I still managed to poison
you once with almonds. I feel really bad
about that.
>> Yeah. How did that happen?
>> I don't know. I So for listeners, I
didn't do it on purpose. I bought him
some of those Korean nuts that we'd been
talking about in the snack food episode
and they were almonds so we thought they
were okay
>> but like laced with something else.
There were I didn't die.
>> Yeah. So, that's always a plus. I didn't
kill my co-host.
>> Anyway, despite my own because I'm a
journalist dedicated to learning about
the truth about the world, I will get
over my personal biases against nuts in
pursuit of journalistic truth and
learning more about how all these
businesses work, the chocolate business
and all these work, how these work, just
because I I I want to learn more about
the world even when I cannot partake of
its goodness. Um I think that is a very
worthy cause. The one thing I would say
is this is really interesting from just
a investment and business perspective
because you have heard every once in a
while people do get really excited about
nuts as an investment. And the example
I'm thinking of is remember Michael Bur
10 years ago. Yeah. His whole thing was
invest in almonds because they're so
water intensive. It's basically a play
on water shortages.
>> I don't think it worked out that well.
So either I'm kind of curious. Uh yeah,
that was like at the end of the big
short that very cryptic ending where
they're like and after betting against
the collapse of the US housing market,
he has now shifted his attention to
almonds.
>> No, no, no. They said water. They didn't
even say almonds would
>> very strange. It was Anyway,
>> yes. What can we learn through the
medium of uh of nuts? Anyway, very
excited to say that we have a couple of
guests today who have been doing a lot
of work on nuts. someone uh a couple of
guests. I think we talked to them about
5 years ago during the pandemic. Uh
they're interested in frontier markets.
They go all around the world looking for
interesting opportunities that are off
the beaten path. They've been doing some
research on the hazelnut industry and
they're based in Dubai. We're going to
be speaking with Burton Flynn and Ivan
Neunev. They are managing partners at
Terteranova Capital. They scour the
world for interesting stories. They're
based in Dubai. Burton and Ivan, thank
you so much for coming back on OddLots.
>> Thank you so much for having us.
>> Yeah, thanks for having us.
>> I just have like a really simple
question. In Dubai, is it just called
chocolate? Like cuz it's or do they also
specify that it's Dubai chocolate even
when it's in Dubai?
>> Well, you know, the the original Dubai
chocolate is is called fix. Um and and
so in Dubai there's fix chocolate and
then there's the knockoff, you know,
other kinds of chocolates. And uh the
fixed chocolate, I didn't know this when
I received it as a gift once actually
about 6 months ago when the first time I
had it.
>> Uhhuh.
>> Somebody brought it to my house. They
brought me five bars and and uh as a
gift and we ate them that week and then
later I found out that these bars go for
like $25 a piece.
>> Oh, that was a good gift.
>> So I I did Yeah, it was
>> Wait, how much of that is the um the
cocoa price versus the pistachio price?
Because we've seen both of those kind of
go up recently. Oh, well I mean this
this was before any of that went up,
right? So So this is this is all just
margin based on uh marketing, I think,
branding.
>> So why don't you tell us generally
speaking besides the fact that you're in
Dubai actually tell us about the work
that you do? We we sort of covered it in
when we talked to you in 2020, but
presumably we have a lot of listeners
who haven't listened to that episode.
Why don't both of you tell us like how
you approach your work discovering new
thing interesting things around the
world?
>> First of all, what we look for our
objective is to find stocks that can
double in 12 months. And the way that we
do that is we look for basically you you
guys know growth uh GARP investing,
right? Growth at at a reasonable price.
We are not GARP investors. Uh we are
growth at an unreasonable price
investors. We go out and we we look for
uh really huge uh earnings growth that
is being completely mis mis uh
understood or completely overlooked
because you know what we believe that a
good stock you know it has to be a good
business plus something that's
fundamentally misunderstood. So the the
way that we do this is we approach it
from se several different angles. One is
that on a daily basis we're looking at
insider transactions. Basically CEOs
buying shares of their own companies. We
find that to be a really strong signal.
We also look for companies that have
very good leading indicators to their
earnings and and we try to monitor
those. And then also periodically we
like to reach out to all of the
companies we've met. And at this point
we uh together Ivan and I have met over
2,000 companies. We've conducted 2600
meetings in the past six years um with
both of us in in all of those meetings.
Most of those were with CEOs. And so,
uh, we like to reach out periodically
and just ask about topical situations
that are happening. Uh, the most recent
one was the Trump tariffs, you know, and
and understand how it's affecting their
business. So, we get kind of a a global
view based on a a bottomup perspective.
>> So, how did nuts actually get on your
radar other than, you know, a friend
gave you 25 bars of overpriced luxury
chocolate?
>> Well, you know, it's an interesting
story because we are based in Dubai. So
just by definition we are right in the
center of this Dubai chocolate hysteria.
Like you see Dubai chocolate bars
everywhere in the grocery stores. Then
you see them when you order food online.
You see them on the billboards and uh
you know sometimes you hear from people
that haven't been in touch for like 10
years and then they message you and all
they want is not not not actually even
ask how are you doing but they just want
you to ship some Dubai chocolate to them
by some express uh you know courier
delivery. And you know it it's fun. A
lot of media has written about um the
Dubai chocolate phenomenon and I think
there was also a claim that uh Dubai
chocolate led to some severe shortages
of pistachios and skyrocketing prices of
pistachios which is debatable. Um but
one day we were in the office and we
were just just joking around and we were
saying look you know pistachios are such
a kind of a hot niche commodity now let
let's let's have a look at something
else. What about hazelnuts? Cuz you know
they're also used in chocolates and so
on, even in some of the variations of
the Dubai chocolate, the knockoff ones.
Uh, and we checked kind of the recent
news about hazelnuts just to see what's
going on with the hazelnuts. And u, and
what we found was actually quite, you
know, it was really, really, really
interesting.
>> Well, before we actually get to the
hazelnuts, I'm curious. You mentioned
there were these media reports of
pistachio shortages or skyrocketing uh
skyrocketing prices and then you said
but that's debatable. What actually is
happening? You know I don't know. I
don't know. I don't think we have like a
pistachio index on the terminal although
I've never actually looked.
>> I think a lot of them come from um Iran
which might also
>> right which might also but like actually
what like how do you what is happening
in the pistachio market? What has been
the effect so far as you can tell from
the Dubai chocolate craze to the actual
trade in pistachios?
>> Yeah, actually quite a lot has to do
simply with weather. It's not only it's
not only the Dubai chocolate demand uh
but a lot of that has to do with the
weather and just the weather was not
favorable enough uh and the the crop was
not good enough. So as simple as that.
So because I remember there was one
expert on pistachio supply chain and he
was saying that basically there's now so
much talk and a lot of media articles
claiming that it's all about Dubai
chocolate but in reality Dubai chocolate
doesn't use the raw uh pistachios you
know it's a paste and a paste is very
very diluted so you don't really need
like all the pistachios in the world to
produce Dubai chocolate but you know if
the weather events affect uh the crop
then of course the price of the
commodity will go up. And this is
something that also happened uh to the
hazelnuts this year.
>> So it's a supply story more than a
demand story for pistachios at least.
>> It could be both. Could be both. But
without the supply shortage, there would
not be such a severe price appreciation.
>> How did Turkey get into the hazelnut
business? Because they seem to have made
a conscious decision to actually, you
know, nurse this particular type of
agriculture. Yeah, it's it's a long
story uh which goes back thousands of
years and u the situation is that uh
Turkish Black Sea region is naturally
the best region in the world uh to grow
hazelnuts because hazelnuts need a cool
winter. They also need sunny warm spring
and also need a rainy summer and this is
exactly what the Turkish Black Sea
region gives them and they've been
cultivated in Turkey for thousands of
years. So today there are 600,000
farmers that grow hazelnuts in Turkey
and there are over 5 million people in
Turkey who are in some way involved in
the hazelnut farming or trading
business. So it's it's a very very long
history. It just came naturally. It's
just where the hazelnuts grow. In a
given year, Turkey produces about 70% of
all the hazelnuts in the world. So the
the concentration in this industry is
huge. It's like 70% of all hazelnuts. So
if something happens to the Turkish
hazelnut crop, you know, the
consequences to the supply can be
severe.
[Music]
What is the market structure of the
Turkish hazelnut industry? How
fragmented are those 600,000 farmers? Is
it huge aggra businesses uh that
dominate the trade? And then what is the
exchange process like? I don't know. I
assume there's not hazelnut futures, but
talk to us about like that process by
which the uh the nuts get to the
processors and then f into an finished
product.
>> Yeah, so there's 600,000 farmers.
They're quite fragmented. It's basically
some artisan mom and pop farmer shops
and then there are some wholesalers uh
who buy hazelnuts from the farmers uh
when the harvest time comes around which
is actually next week and then the
wholesalers uh they might sell their
hazelnuts to the exporters and then the
exporters sell them abroad or some of
these wholesalers they also act as
exporters. So, so basically if you
compare the hazelnut industry in Turkey
to the one in Chile, then the Turkish
one is much more old school. It's very
small orchards, it's family businesses,
it's some standalone farms. Uh whereas
for example in in Chile, it's kind of
industrial scale. So, so and then once a
year this all gets consolidated. Uh the
farmers sell their hazelnuts to
wholesalers and then the entire kind of
chain starts. It's quite fragmented and
and you know the the quality of the
entire hazelnut production in Turkey is
lower than in some other parts of the
world because also it's not only the
history, it's also kind of the terrain.
It's a bit hilly. Uh it's much harder to
have this huge fields of hazelnut
plantations. It's a long-standing
tradition and it's very very hard to
bring any innovation into the Turkish
hazelnut farming.
>> Okay. So you have a traditional business
that's resistant to innovation in an
emerging market that is very very
fragmented and also pretty untransparent
because it's not like you can look up a
single benchmark for hazelnut prices.
How do you deal with I guess the
opakeness of a niche commodity like this
when you're evaluating an investment?
Well, this is this is exactly the kind
of situation we love actually is is
opakeness because it means that it's
difficult for others to kind of access,
you know, access the information. And so
the the way we approach it is we try to
find primary sources, right? And so in
this in this case, we have had the
opportunity to talk to the world's
largest hazelnut processing company and
basically understand the the market
situation from them, you know, and then
kind of collaborate this with other
sources that we find and and you know,
continue to to ask them questions to to
understand the the market situation. But
uh you know it it's possible that we
might be the you know some of the
world's best best experts on hazelnuts
uh even though we didn't know anything
about them two months ago. So
>> what do you look at in terms of just
pricing?
>> There is pricing. It's not something you
can pull up on Bloomberg. So basically
when we were talking to the the COO of
of this Hazelnut operating uh operator
um he said that uh you know it's it's
it's basically a price that um is called
on the phone. I mean it's this is like
old school trading you know practices.
>> There are no hazelnut futures. It's
nearly impossible to trade hazelnuts you
know through any agricultural exchanges
and it makes this market so inaccessible
that it's it's very hard it's very hard
for a regular investor to play it. I
mean, I think the only way to play the
hazelnut market is probably through this
only listed public uh like the only
publicly listed hazelnut processing
company in the world and it's listed in
Turkey, which also is not so easy to
access. But when it comes to hazelnuts
themselves, it looks like you just need
to to find the party that can sell this
hazelnuts and you just buy the bags, the
tones of hazelnuts, but you also need to
find a transportation. You need to find
the storage and then then you need to
find a buyer when you want to sell. So
it's a it's a very very difficult one to
access.
[Music]
something I'm interested in, you know,
this idea of there not having been much
productivity gains in the actual farming
of hazelnuts. And I'm sort of fascinated
by the degree to which different
commodities inherently lend themselves
to varying levels of mechanization in
production. Right? And so, you know, you
could have competitively priced wheat in
that's grown in America, competitively
priced wheat that's grown in Russia,
competitively priced wheat or corn
that's grown in Brazil, all because
there's very little labor involved. You
have like one one uh combine out there
on a giant field.
And then you have other commodities that
are inherently labor intensive because
not so easy to automate. What have you
seen you know as you've gone around the
world to frontier various frontier
markets the sort of range by which some
commodities lend themselves to
productivity gains and some don't.
>> You know for example in this hazeland
industry right we can look at Turkey
which we discussed it's artisanal
>> and then we can look at something like
Chile. So by nature, Chile is not
necessarily the best place for growing
hazelnuts because it doesn't have enough
moisture. However, if you manage to
provide enough irrigation, then you
solve that issue. So in Chile for
example, uh you can grow hazelnuts with
a much much higher yield uh than in
Turkey. You can have huge plantations of
hazelnuts. you provide irrigation and
then you can get probably five six times
more hazelnuts per hectare of land than
in Turkey. And this is all this is
something that started happening in the
last several years. Uh and um the
projection is that Chile will become the
number two producer of hazelnuts in the
world in about 7 to 10 years with a
production capacity of 200,000 tons a
year which still compared to the Turkish
supply capacity of 800,000 tons a year
is quite small you know and and this
just um kind of uh underlines the the
sheer importance of the Turkish market
for hazelnut business.
>> Um, do you have any idea why Chile
decided to go in on hazelnuts? I'm just
very curious about how they make these
decisions because, you know, it's not
necessarily a completely natural crop.
As you pointed out, Chile doesn't have,
you know, that much rainfall and so they
have to do something in order to foster
this industry. Why did they decide on
hazelnuts in particular?
>> The initiative comes from um from the
bottom up. So for example, this largest
hazelnut processor that's based in
Turkey, they decided to expand in Chile,
right? So it it wasn't kind of Chilean
government initiative. It was kind of
the com the corporate initiative because
they looked at many different countries.
They looked at New Zealand uh where it's
more hilly which would be more
difficult. They looked at Latin America
and in Chile there is this great culture
of um basic of growing agricultural
commodities right it's industrialized
it's uh possible to make it large scale
uh and they just needed to add
irrigation and that would be it. The
other thing is that it provides a very
nice diversification for them, right?
Because as we're talking about, there
was a huge weather event that disrupted
the supply in Turkey. Turkey is the vast
vast majority of of the production. So
for them to have, you know, the crop in
an entire different hemisphere, um, you
know, with with different conditions
provides, you know, provides some sort
of diversification.
>> What do you tell us about that weather
event specifically since this seems to
be central to your interest? How big of
a deal is it? Is it a one-off? And
second of all, like give us the overall
sort of supply demand imbalance that you
analyze right now for the hazelnut
market.
>> Every about 10 years, uh there's a big
frost that happens in Turkey. So the
previous ones happened in 2004 and 2014
and this year there was a very very
major frost in April which destroyed
onethird of all Turkish hazelnuts.
Basically in a few days one third of the
entire crop was destroyed and uh frost
like this as I said they happen once
every 10 years they are quite oneoff but
the thing is that this year Turkey had a
very very warm spring so the hazelnut
trees started developing much earlier
and then when the frost happened they
were exposed to this huge risk and they
got damaged really badly. Now this is
one thing. So the frost destroyed
onethird of the Turkish hazelnut crop.
The second thing is there's another kind
of small little creature uh named the
marmmorated brown the brown marmmorated
stink bug which only settled in Turkey
in 2017 but it has become so widespread
that in a given year it can destroy from
10 to 20% of the entire hazelnut crop in
Turkey. So we read some academic
research about it. It was fascinating.
So on top of the frost, you also have
the stinking bug. But then that's not
the entire story. Then there's also the
heat. And in the western Black Sea
region in Turkey this year, the summer
was the worst summer in the last 65
years. The hottest, the driest summer.
And um what does it mean? It means that
the hazelnuts that did survive the
frost, that did survive the stink bug,
they will not develop as well as they
should have because they need moisture.
The nuts, the kernels, they need the
moisture. But without the moisture,
without the water, with this huge like
dry hot weather, they will be damaged.
They will be underdeveloped. Some of
them won't develop at all at all. So
just to give you some numbers, so the
expectation for this year's crop was
768,000
tons of inshell hazelnuts in Turkey. Now
after the frost, after the stink bug
impact, and after the heat, the Ministry
of Agriculture in Turkey now estimates
this year's crop to be at around 450
460,000 tons, which is about 40%
lower supply than expected. This is for
the inshell hazelnuts. Now kind of going
back to this heat uh if you look at the
kernels then the kernels will be
impacted even more. So last year for
example the yield which is measured as
the proportion of the weight of the
kernel to the weight to the weight of
the entire hazelnut was 48%. This year
it will be much lower. So the actual
hazelnut kernels which is what's
important will probably be in shortage
by about 45 up to 50% this year. So now
the entire Turkish crop might suffer by
45 50% this year which means the entire
global crop of hazelnuts might suffer by
35%.
And the demand the demand for Turkish
hazelnuts is 320,000 tons for the export
and 70,000 tons for the domestic use. So
390,000 tons of kernels. This is
kernels. And the production of kernels
this year in Turkey will probably be
half that. So we're looking basically at
a supply which will be half of the
demand.
Joe, I have to say that I am
unfortunately very familiar with
marmorated brown stink bugs because
they've made their way to New England,
too. Oh, really? Yeah. They're invasive
there, too. And in the winter, they
really like to crawl into old houses and
just
>> And they really smell. Huh.
>> They if you scare them, they smell.
Okay.
>> Or if you kill them.
>> Um and they just sort of fly around and
make a lot of noise. Anyway, okay. The
thing I don't quite get about this
particular investment,
I guess I I understand there's a
shortage, a potential shortage of
hazelnuts, and that could translate into
higher wholesale prices, but how does
that actually feed into higher prices or
profits for the hazelnut processor, who
I assume, you know, has to pay the
higher prices on the wholesale end, and
then maybe they can charge higher prices
for it at the retail end, but you know,
it's not guaranteed that that margins
going to go up?
>> Well, first of all, they have some
inventory
uh which they have built over the past
season and the thing is the processor
applies mathematical models and weather
weather pattern prediction models to uh
manage their inventories. So this year
when there was a very very warm winter
and early spring, they knew that if some
kind of frost happens, it doesn't have
to be a severe frost because the
hazelnuts already developed quite a bit.
So if something happens, then the damage
will be severe. So they managed to
increase their inventory, right? This is
one thing. The price in the market of
course will go up a lot. We looked at
the previous frosts in 2004 and 2014. So
the prices for hazelnuts went up about
three and a half 4x from just before the
frost to about one year later. Right? So
if you have inventory and if you hold on
to it and then you kind of sell it
later, you make some profits. But also
uh even when you buy from the farmers
and when there's this shortage of
hazelnuts in in the world you can kind
of command higher margin and the buyers
will have to pay it you know because
they have no other option.
>> The inventory uh reported on their Q1
financial report was $164 million which
is I think something like a third of of
their market cap. Um and that's you know
that's before the increase in in prices.
What is the structural demand story for
hazelnuts? So again, we're t, you know,
with the pistachio question, we know
that whether whether it's the demand
that's driving the price or the supply,
we know that demand has been booming.
Maybe the Dubai chocolate trend will
fizzle out at some point. But for we
don't know, but uh for hazelnuts, what
is the long-term structural demand
outlook look like? Because we already
have hazelnut chocolate which is already
>> right and it's already been huge and
Nutella has been a staple of the
internet and people talking about it the
culture for a long time. Is it rapidly
growing still? Has it plateaued? What's
happening there?
>> It's not growing rapidly but it's still
growing. For example, from 2014 until
now the demand for hazelnuts went up
more than 30% overall. So I would say
it's probably like a 2 3% a year growth
which which is still there. So it's it's
slow but uh it's it's going up. And you
mentioned Nutella. Just wanted to
mention very interesting fact. Um so
Ferrerero Ferrero buys a quarter of the
entire uh global hazelnut supply every
year. So so it sounds really fascinating
you know that one single kind of entity
just buys the quarter of the entire
supply. So, one of the really
interesting things I think that's been
happening in the world certainly since
2020 is this idea of overlapping
emergencies. That's Isabella Vber's
term, but this idea that, you know,
something dramatic always seems to be
going on and it always seems to be
sparking some sort of shortage. And
we've certainly seen that in the world
of commodities. And I can rattle off a
bunch of, you know, pretty like niche
ones that have had some sort of supply
squeeze. So cocoa, obviously, orange
juice, wheat during Ukraine, Russia,
hazelnuts, now maybe pistachios earlier.
Would you expect as more of these happen
to for those markets to become maybe
more financialized or maybe more easy
for investors such as yourselves to
invest in?
>> Well, I I don't know about um it making
it easier to invest in, but I think that
these kinds of events create huge
opportunities. you know that you you
mentioned Coco. Um, Coco's really
interesting because uh this is actually
something that we studied last year and
we came across a a stock uh which is one
of the only stocks that you can sort of
play Coco and it's it's um listed in
Malaysia and it's you know it doesn't
have massive liquidity but it has it has
sufficient liquidity and uh we we had
noticed last year of course there was a
weather event that caused the cocoa you
know cocoa supply to to drop by about
14% you This is because in West Africa
they they produce 70% of of the global
cocoa supply. You know, we we started
looking at potential plays on on cocoa.
By the time we found this stock that we
looked at, uh it it had already played
out. But what we did was we created a
case study to understand kind of how how
this timing worked out. What we found is
actually that the cocoa prices um
increased several months before the
stock price had increased. So again,
it's it's another case of kind of an
obscure company that u that people
weren't really watching even though
there's there's sort of an obvious play.
The other really interesting thing that
we noticed about this company is we
looked at the insider buying disclosures
and the CEO and and the the management
were buying like crazy. The the the
stock leading up to or you know kind of
as as the weather event um and the the
glo cocoa supply situation was was
developing. So I I'm not sure about uh
you know providing better access but I
think that these sorts of uh global
events you know can provide really huge
opportunities if you you know if you
kind of do the work right
>> but for Coco I mean you could just go
out and buy a future right or I think
there's even a Coco ETF now why not just
do that is that because your expertise
is sort of in single stock businesses or
you don't want to become a commodity
player and
>> we're we're not top down investors we're
very much bottomup investors And so you
know so so when something like this is
happening of course you can play the
trend of the you know the the cocoa
price itself but that you know that's
obviously going to also depend on kind
of the market dynamics. What we find is
that there's bigger opportunities in in
sort of a second order which is you know
a a cocoa company that's going to
benefit you know from these prices.
their their earnings, but the earnings
lag, you know, a quarter, two quarters,
and this the stock really gets rewarded
when, you know, when they start
producing the earnings, uh, at least in
in these sorts of markets, you know,
that's why we see this as as a more
interesting way to play it than than
just writing the, you know, the trend of
the the futures prices.
>> Can you talk, you know, you mentioned
finding a random cocoa company in
Malaysia and the due diligence work you
have to do, reaching out to management?
Can you talk about the state of
essentially IR uh in frontier markets?
Right. We go to a website like an
American big company like a Pepsi or
something and they have this incredibly
full IR page that has you know their
presentations and the number of the uh
you know the main person and all their
earnings etc. How varied is the quality
of IR in the markets that you look at?
>> Hugely varied. Um and uh so so in the
case you know in the case of this
hazelnut processor uh they only have
investor relations uh materials
basically in Turkish um which is you
know of course you can you know if you
do the work you can you can translate
this stuff easily uh these days but but
you know what we found over the years is
that some companies have very good
investor relations practices and and
some don't and we've uh selectively
taken opportunity to basically uh teach
companies how to improve their investor
relations practices. Basically, we we
give them free consulting, you know,
after they've become portfolio companies
on on basically best practices on
investor relations. What we've seen is
that uh some companies have been highly
willing to engage with us to improve
their their investor relations
practices. Uh other companies have have
kind of shied away from it. And you
know, we we actually looked at the the
uh the results of companies that we
engaged with. And we found that the
companies that were willing to engage
with us were three times as likely to
see their stock prices double in the 12
months following our engagement than
other stocks uh that we had bought in
our portfolio. So, so it could be on the
one hand that these recommendations are
very valuable that uh companies now, you
know, are going out to the market and
sharing how great their their business
is and and investors are are learning
about that. Another, you know, another
uh explanation could be that it's a
feedback loop and that, you know,
companies that have really great things
to tell are the companies that, you
know, are are happy to go out and talk
to the market. Whereas, you know, if
they really don't have great things
coming down the pipeline, they don't
really want to go out and and make a lot
of noise.
>> Yeah, Tracy, I had a friend of mine,
this was like 20 years ago, etc., but he
was engaged in some forms of like
frontier market investing, and he
thought there was like a pretty big
alpha opportunity in essentially doing
exactly what Burton just described. I
think he once told me about I don't know
a chain some company that owned a lot of
gas stations in Laos or something like
that and the opportunities that it's
like here can I just like help you build
out your IR page because your financials
are really compelling and almost nobody
almost nobody even knows about them or
could figure it out even if they wanted
to.
>> Did it work?
>> Uh I don't know but it see but it it
seems like an interesting idea. Um,
okay. So, if we look at the past uh 2014
frost, the past president, how long did
that actually have an impact on prices
or how long did it take for hazelnut
prices to normalize?
>> So, what happened in 2014? Uh, the price
started going up in March 2014, right
after the frost when the degree of
destruction became clear and then it
reached its peak at the end of April,
early May 2015. So the following year
and then by that time usually it's quite
clear if the new crop of the new year
will be substantial or not. So in that
case it was quite a good crop and the
prices started going down quite uh
quickly. So uh the price went up over 3
and a halfx from March 2014 to May 2015
and then it dropped uh I would say about
50% in just one one and a half months.
So I still have time to buy Nutella
before the big price spike.
>> Yeah, you know when we looked at it, so
first there is like a 30% spike uh from
the time of the frost uh till August
when the harvest starts. Uh and then
from August to late April there is kind
of the the the mo most of the price
increase uh happens uh in that time
frame. I just have one last question and
it's inspired by a tweet I saw yesterday
from the Chinese embassy in the US and
they're talking about um the des
deesertification that they're doing in
China essentially turning desert into
arable land and I'm curious uh what
you're seeing if that's something that
you're thinking about. I mean, we're so
used to talking about disruption coming
from China from a manufactured
standpoint, but in terms of its own, I
mean, it has a lot of land. Much of it
historically has not been arable.
They're trying to reverse that, which
you can obviously do if you have
sufficient access to irrigation
technology and electricity, etc. When
you look out in the long-term hazelnut
uh supply story, you mentioned Chile
growing. uh is this is going to be a big
story and more is this a story that
you're thinking about in a markets
whether hazelnut or general China
turning itself into a a sort of a
man-made bread basket
everything is possible um but it it's a
very very long-term top- down trend so
our job is we are emerging markets uh
investors traveling the world in search
of hidden gems through bottom up
opportunities so I mean it's possible
but again it's a very long-term top-
down sort of trend. And as I mentioned,
Chile might produce double the number of
hazelnuts they do today uh in 10 years.
But then who knows what's going to
happen to the weather patterns in Turkey
in 10 years because it looks like, you
know, the winters are becoming warmer
and the summers sometimes are becoming
drier and hotter and uh I think the
predictability is getting uh worse.
>> Burton and Ivan, thank you so much for
uh coming back on OddLots. I've learned
a lot about uh hazelnuts, which I didn't
know about. And I hear they're good, but
I still don't know. But now I have to
take our word for I can't taste them,
but at least I know something about them
now.
>> To us, hazelnuts taste much better than
Dubai chocolate. At least it's much
healthier.
>> All right. Well,
>> yeah. Thank you.
[Music]
Tracy, I think your uh invocation of
overlapping emergencies is really apt.
Like we're going to be doing a lot of
these episodes in the future about all
kinds of niche commodities over the
years.
>> It does feel like that. And there are
some technological solutions that I
guess can help at the margins. But even
in that conversation, Burton and Ivan
were talking about, you know, this
Turkish processor. They have weather
technology. So they had an early sign
that the hazelnuts had grown, you know,
big early, which made them susceptible
to a potential frost. And so they
started building up their inventory and
then lo and behold, the frost hit and
they're in a relatively good position.
That's good for them, but it doesn't
expand the absolute supply of hazelnuts,
right?
>> Yeah. I feel like a tech is like a
really interesting story. You know, we
did that episode with the lentil king of
Saskatchewan uh several months ago, and
I feel like there are sort of two
different things because farmers in any
country, as he noted, are always going
to be among the politically most
protected class. Politicians feel some
sort of obligation to protect farmers
almost always. On the other hand, like
any other good, you know, there's going
to at least in theory be opportunities
for genuine productivity gains. and if
Chile is stronger at irrigation etc.
It'll be interesting to watch the sort
of like interplay between like
technology that gets applied to growing
anything cultivating anything including
in Chile and maybe in the future in
China versus the political desire and
sort of legacy producers to um you know
protect the the small artisan farmer on
the hillside.
>> Yeah, that's right. There is that
tension and it becomes more prominent
the more overlapping emergencies that we
see.
>> I think the problem for hazelnuts is
that they're brown and they could it's
just never going to go viral the same
way because it just does not that green
if the pistachio whether in chocolate or
now you know you see them a lot more
like um on top of a croissant shredded
up etc.
>> Like that's just made for 2025 in a way
that a hazelnut isn't. Also, sorry, but
hazelnut chocolate is already a classic.
>> No, like it's already it's mature.
>> Maybe someone can come up with uh green
hazelnuts.
>> Yeah, genetic engineering.
>> Yeah. Yeah,
>> that's the next frontier of viral
chocolate making. Genetically engineered
nuts,
>> better looking produce. I mean, that
really is going to be the key, right? I
I unironically
any piece of produce that photographs
well, etc. is going to be big. I mean,
this is why people drink matcha.
>> Glitter infused hazelnuts. What's going
to happen?
>> Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Dashel
Bennett at Dashbot and Kalebrooks at
Kalebrooks. For more OddLots content, go
to bloomberg.com/odlots.
through the daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk about niche commodity
markets and short squeezes, then please
leave us a positive review on your
favorite podcast platform. And remember,
if you are a Bloomberg subscriber, you
can listen to all of our episodes
absolutely adree. All you need to do is
find the Bloomberg channel on Apple
Podcast and follow the instructions
there. Thanks for listening.
[Music]
Yeah.
Heat.
[Music]